Unix has its own unique
way of handling processes,
and understanding it will help in
creating scripts and
debugging problems.
Starting from the top and
working our way down,
a process is an instance
of a running program.
A process can kick off
other processes which
can in turn kick off other
additional processes.
If you were to chart
all of this out,
it would look like
a family tree and
those processes are called
parent processes and
child processes.
So a parent process
creates child processes.
That organization of
parent processes and
child processes is
called a process tree.
When a parent process
spawns a child process,
that parent process
can share some, none,
or all of its resources
with the child process.
The parent process
can run alongside
the child process or it can wait
until the child process is done.
In Unix, the command to see
the processes that
are running is PS,
short for Process Status.
The BPXBATCH utility gives
you a way of running
Unix scripts and applications
as z/OS batch jobs.
There's two ways
of invoking this,
as JCL and as a TSO command.
You can see here, that looks
like Unix stuff to me.
We've got a shell script here and
DD statements for the output
and error streams over here.
You can also run BPXBATCH as
a TSO command.
Here's one example.
The SH tells BPXBATCH to start
a shell and run shell
commands or scripts.
So if you want to run
a script and then
redirect the output to do
something you'd normally
type into the shell,
that's where you do that.
You can also use BPXBATCH
PGM which is for a program.
It will kick off a
program in what's called
a spawn or a fork and exec.
It takes the parameters you
specify which are separated
by spaces and sends
them into the program.
So not only can you use
BPXBATCH to do units from z/OS,
there's a few
different ways you can
do it depending on your needs.
You've seen in the JCL
example that there are
three types of files that
are running program uses.
There's standard input,
standard output,
and standard error.
Input is any source of
input which could be
from the keyboard or it could
be the output from
another program.
Standard output is where
a program typically
writes out its progress and
informational messages,
and standard error is
where you'd look for
details on why a program
isn't running quite right.
Hopefully, you don't have to
spend too much time
looking in there.
One thing you have to
keep track of in Unix
is users, groups,
and permissions.
Each user has a user ID or
UID on a z/OS system with RACF.
Part of your RACF
profile contains
the information about
your USS user ID,
what directory all
of your stuff is in,
what type of shell you like
to use, all that stuff.
The user who is logged in can
also issue the
Switch User command,
su pronounced sue to
become another user.
They, of course, need
permission to do
that and they might have to
enter the password to switch.
But that really helps when
you set something up for
another user and
you want to try it
out as them before you tell them,
''It's all good, ready to go.''
In addition to user IDs,
there are also group IDs.
The idea there being
that you can have
a bunch of users in a group that
have access to some
of the same files
but not necessarily
all of the same files.
So about that whole access thing,
when you look at a thing,
and I'm being
purposely vague here,
but when you look
at a thing in Unix,
you get back something
that looks like this.
The first character says
what that thing is.
It could be a file,
in which case you'd see a dash.
It could be a directory in
which case you'll see a D,
or a symbolic link,
a type of shortcut or
pointer which shows up as an
L. Then you get this series
of letters and dashes.
The letters are r, w,
and x which stand for
read, write, and execute.
It determines whether
the file can be read,
write, or executed
run as a program.
There's three sets
of these letters.
The first set of saying what
the owner of the
file can do with it.
It only makes sense
that a user would have
read and write access
to their own file
though they probably
wouldn't have execute access
unless it's a program or a
script they want to run.
The next section
is for the group.
A file is also
associated with a group.
I might have a file that
my coworkers need to
read but I don't want
them to write to it.
So I can set that up with
just read access for them.
The last group is for
other, for everybody else.
If I want other people who
aren't me or people who
aren't specifically in that
group to have some access,
I set those permissions
here. Good job guys.
Take five. These are the
permissions for files.
They look the same for
directories but with a
slightly different meaning.
Read means that you
can see the contents,
write means you can
add or delete things,
and execute means you can
go into the directory.
Sometimes it makes sense
to represent permissions
numerically.
You'll see this a lot
of times when you're
setting permissions
from the command line.
Each permission has a value.
Read is four, write is
two, execute is one.
You figure out what
permissions you want.
If any, add them
together and that's it.
Here's what all of the
combinations look like.
So if I have a file where I
need full access including read,
write, and execute
and no one else
gets anything, it'll be 700.
Another example, if I have a
file that I can read, write,
and execute the specified
group members can read and
execute but not write and
everybody else can only read.
That would be, you know what,
why don't you tell me?
Pop quiz time.
The answer is 754.
Seven because that's everything
plus it's 4 plus 2 plus 1.
Five for group
because that's read
4 plus execute 1 equals five.
For others, they get four
because they can read
it but nothing else.
Here's a listing of some
other common user group,
or their permissions.
These will come in handy.
So maybe take a
screenshot or something.
If you have a file and you
want to change the
permissions on it,
use the chmod command, chmod.
You say chmod, the numerical
permission followed
by the file name.
You can also do it in
one section at a time
by typing chmod g plus w,
for example to give right
access to the group.
But be careful what
permissions you give out.
When you give
permissions to others,
so someone else not in
the group can have
access to a file,
you're giving those
permissions to
literally everybody
else on the system.
If you're working with people
you need to share access with,
consider using a group.
That's literally what
they're there for.
Like I said, Unix
is its own beast.
Like z/OS, there's no single spot
that marks when you've learned
all there is to learn.
But we have hit a
pretty good spot
right here where at least you're
prepared to get started with
Unix system services on z/OS.
So that brings this
lesson to a close.